Tien Li Shen
Email: timshen1999@gmail.com          Phone: (774) 274-2712           
Home: Quincy, Massachusetts      Security Clearance Level: Secret
Systems Engineer with a strong background in software safety, digital design verification, and embedded systems. Experienced in safety analysis for complex defense systems, formal verification of FPGA toolchains, and UVM-based SoC validation. MS in Computer Engineering with hands-on skills in C++, Python, SystemVerilog, and safety-critical analysis. Passionate about building safe, reliable systems that drive innovation in aerospace and defense.

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCES
RTX | Raytheon Missiles and Defense, Tewksbury, MA 
Systems Engineer II, October 2023 - April 2025
Served as Safety Lead on new system concept proposals of the Patriot SAM system, including the Warfighter Machine Interface, Radar Surveillance, Guidance, Command and Control, and Tactical Initialization.
Analyzed 170+ Software Investigation Reports, 110+ safety-critical software updates, and 40+ system requirement changes—identifying over 30 potential safety hazards and ensuring appropriate mitigation and rigor in hazard tracking.
Collaborated with safety, systems, and validation engineers to produce and deliver a comprehensive Patriot Safety Assessment Report to customers, in compliance with Military Standards 882E.
Intel Corporation, Hudson, MA
DDRIO Pre-Silicon Design Verification Intern, May 2022 - August 2022
Implemented UVM monitor and checker in SystemVerilog to validate DLL phase power optimization features across 30 instantiations in DDRIO, enabling a new power-saving feature to be released on the next-gen Intel server processor.
Contributed to CI/CD initiatives by optimizing regression test sets, improving test execution efficiency, and streamlining the testing-release pipeline to accelerate delivery without compromising quality.
Developed a Python tool to compare register specs between source code and Excel files, identifying over 200 discrepancies used across RTL, validation, and analog teams.
Reconfigurable Computing Group, University of Massachusetts Amherst
Graduate Research Assistant, August 2021 - May 2022
Collaborated with a team of 4 graduate students to formally verify the open-source Symbiflow FPGA toolchain and delivered the software product to our sponsor.
Implemented software changes and scripts to formally verified Yosys hardware synthesis software with Cadence Conformal LEC on 120 benchmark designs.
Verified 21 benchmark designs synthesized by open-source software Yosys functioning on the FPGA development board and equivalent to commercial software Xilinx Vivado simulation using synthesizable RTL test harness.


PROJECTS
Multi-threaded HTTP Server (C++)
Collaborated with three graduate students to create a multi-threaded HTTP Server in C++.
Implemented server support for JPEG photos requests, HTTP requests, and request errors.
Performed performance evaluation on our C++ multi-threaded HTTP Server against an open-source Apache HTTP server by measuring throughput and latency for thousands of concurrent clients.
Kaggle Machine Learning Competition: Mechanism of Action Prediction (Python)
Reduced the dimensions of the Mechanism of Action dataset with Principal Component Analysis.
Implemented and optimized machine learning classifiers, including Ridge regression, logistic regression, AdaBoost, random forest, and multilayer perceptron classifiers.
Senior Design Project: Active Window (Smart Window)
Collaborated with a team of four students to design and build connected smart windows.
Calibrated temperature, photoresistor, and rain detector sensors to stimulate the window modules.
Designed and built a custom CAN transceiver for low-power and long-distance data transmission.
Presented the Active Window project on demo day, highlighting sensor calibration, CAN transceiver design, and smart window module performance.
SRAM Cache Design Project
Created an SRAM cache spec to layout workflow using a combination of commercial and open-source VLSI tools.
Compiled SRAM macro with OpenRAM with NCSU FreePDK 45 nm technology and generated cache RTL in Verilog with open-source software OpenCache.
Synthesized cache block with Synopsys Design Compiler with OpenCell library and SRAM macro database and performed basic floor planning, place, and route with Cadence Encounter.
VLSI Bit Accumulator
Designed a bit accumulator consisting of a full adder and a flip flop in Virtuoso Schematic Editor.
Designed a 12.5 um x 3.7 um IC layout of the accumulator in 45 nm technology with Virtuoso Layout.
Verified design with Hspice simulation and Cscope and characterized maximum frequency and power for the layout design.

EDUCATION
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA
M.S. Computer Engineering (2023), B.S. Computer Engineering (2021)

COMPUTER LANGUAGES (Most Skilled -> Least Skilled) 
Python, C++, Rust, C, SystemVerilog, Verilog, Matlab, Kotlin, Java, Bash, Awk, MIPS

TOOLS
UVM, Git, Tcl, Verdi, Design Compiler, Vivado, ModelSim, HSPICE, Virtuoso, Cscope, Cadence Conformal LEC, Encounter, Intel Quartus Prime, Symbiflow, Yosys
